annual report summary (#209)
kubernetes/steering: reports/summary-2020.md

to make a statement about the importance of inclusivity to where the Kubernetes
project is today, and how racism doesn't have a place in our project.

[core values]: https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/values/
[requiring our community leaders]: https://groups.google.com/u/1/g/kubernetes-dev/c/5gRUxPi5XxY/m/1Ollffx4CQAJ

### #shoutouts

A meta accolade.

The #shoutouts channel on the [Kubernetes slack](slack.k8s.io) and highlights
on [@k8scontributors] in the last year has kept us going. Thank a member of the
community here and read the past achievements of many. 

[@k8scontributors]: https://twitter.com/K8sContributors

### Remembering Dan Kohn

In [November of 2020, Dan Kohn], the former director of the CNCF sadly passed
away from complications with Colon Cancer. Dan was instrumental in shaping both
the Kubernetes project, the CNCF, and the Cloud Native community as a whole. He
understood that a foundation built on a vibrant and diverse community was a
requirement to be successful, and the project would not be what it is today
without him. 

[November of 2020, Dan Kohn]: https://kubernetes.io/blog/2020/11/02/remembering-dan-kohn/

> ## Themes

Reviewer: "Areas for growth?" "Ongoing improvements"? 

"Themes" is a little generic and hard to parse.

Reviewer: OK! :D

The following themes emerged from multiple community groups reporting in with 
similar experiences - whether positive or challenging - and areas of research to
explore more in the future. 

### Project communication strategy 
  

> During major growth phases, the Steering Committee needed the various [community

Reviewer: What's a "major growth phase"?

Reviewer 2: Maybe "During the earlier development phases of the project" ?

Author: During major growth phases when contributor growth was doubling year after year, the Steering Committee (or is that too long?)

meeting style from a "read out" of updates to more discussion oriented.
- Encouraged groups to use asychronous methods for delivering updates and 
gathering feedback. For example: Slack "standup" theads which feed into larger 
scale reporting to a group on a mailing list.
- Created an internal marketing group under SIG Contributor Experience to help
  facilitate community communication.

[Community Meeting]: https://k8s.dev/events/community-meeting/
[community groups to report in and out]: https://git.k8s.io/community/committee-steering/governance/sig-governance.md
[Governance requirements]: https://git.k8s.io/community/committee-steering/governance/sig-governance.md#chair
    
#### Areas of research 

- Review SIG charters to re-focus goals of each group at the current state of
  maturity
- Expand on async meeting adoption and establish best practices 
- Improving subproject communication and connective glue back to the sponsoring
  SIG
- Clarify conditions for archiving or putting a subproject in maintenance mode
- Connecting with the end user community and understanding what they want to
  hear from upstream
  
    

> ### Refining the Contributor Lifecycle

Reviewer: I don't like that this section doesn't follow the same pattern as the others under "Themes". 

The others follow a pattern:

[ Name ]
- Description
- What we've done
- Areas for research

This one has subsections which don't really describe "what we've done" in the same way? It feels like lots of text with no real point to it.

----

Having closely edited my way through this section now... this feels so different than the rest of the document that I wonder if it's its own top-level section, honestly, or even a sub-section under "Contributor Snapshot"?

IMHO: Either parallelize the language/structure of this section to be in line with the other themes as suggested above, OR move this to its own top-level section or a section under contributor snapshot and do a little less editing.

Author: I updated this one - take a look

There are a number of ways to define membership to the Kubernetes project
and its community groups. The project's community groups must define
their own membership terms and then various other activities and roles.
Membership can drive:

- Kubernetes GitHub Organization membership 
- Consensus 
- Voting

> **Project Membership**

Reviewer: This section and the introduction (text under "refining the contributor lifecycle") feel like the overlap. Is there any way we can combine the two sections?

Reviewer 2: How about this for consolidating?

```
The Kubernetes project defines [membership] as contributors added to to one of 
the four GitHub organizations. Membership grants a contributor access to test
their pull requests, among other benefits. Membership also defines a member's
role within the project based on their place on the [Contributor Ladder][ldr].
Membership does not grant voting rights for Steering Committee and
governance matters; there is a separate set of criteria for [elections].

These are guidelines for the project as a whole but do not translate to SIG or
WG based membership, with each group defining membership in their own way.
These methods vary widely and are often founded in the group's specific
workflows. However, there is a common pattern throughout all of them, and that
is the two types of members that are considered early membership (onboarding)
and sustainable membership (ongoing contributor activity).
```

The Kubernetes project defines [membership] as contributors added to to one of 
the four
GitHub organizations. Membership grants a contributor access to test their pull
requests, among other benefits. Membership also defines
a member's role within the project based on their place on the [Contributor
Ladder][ldr]. Membership does not grant voting rights for Steering Committe and
governance matters; there is a separate set of criteria for [elections].

There are two areas to address: early membership (onboarding) and sustainable 
membership (ongoing contributor activity).

> **Early Membership**

Reviewer: What is the point of this section? See my previous comment w.r.t. "Refining the contributor lifecycle" – What is the takeaway for the reader? Why do they need to read this section?

When new contributors onboard to the project, they often ask how to become a 
member of a SIG. Community group membership is currently ambiguous, and the 
options available are overwhelming for new contributors. Many SIGs reported that
"joining the SIG mailing list" is how they define membership.
Other responses included Slack channel membership and OWNERs files. Some groups
requested council from the Steering Committee on defining membership.

Most community groups do not have a voting process as they are driven by 
consensus from OWNERs files and the community-at-large. However, in some cases, 

> particularly leadership transitions, community groups voted to decide.

Reviewer: > voting process

For what? general decisions? membership? leadership?

> driven by consensus from OWNERs files

What is driven by consensus via OWNERs files?

This sentence does not have a subject and is thus grammatically incomplete (and deeply confusing). What are you talking about specifically?

**Sustainable Membership**

While onboarding new contributors is a critical part of a sustainable open
source project, contributors shift focus, change jobs, or
step away from the project for a variety of other reasons. In late 2019, the 
Steering Committee updated our guidelines to include an [emeritus status]. 
Emeritus community members have stepped away from the project, but are still 
recognized for their work. Giving people the ability to step away gracefully 
helps ensure an overall healthy and active community.

> In 2020, 185 members stepped down or were removed for inactivity (18

Reviewer: > In 2020,

Once again – this document uses an inconsistent timeline. This is jarring for the reader, and the data sample period should be consistent across the document.

Author: fixed the title to reflect

months with 0 activity across any GitHub organization). The Kubernetes project 
has around 1300 active members at any given time.   

Joining the project's GitHub organizations is celebrated, but
there are no regular means of celebration or recognition for those that join a

> SIG, community group, or [achievement for climbing the ladder].

Reviewer: This sounds more like a "point for further research" rather than something we've done?

  next step in the lifecycle
- Ways to promote a sustainable flow through the various stages of the lifecycle
- Clarifying and/or simplifying definitions around the stages of the lifecycle
- Prompts to assist contributors in knowing what they need to do to 'level up'
  to the next stage in the lifecycle (e.g. prompts when you join a mailing list)

### Growing a diverse group of OWNERs

Growing on the contributor ladder to ownership doesn't happen immediately after
your first contribution. Building trust is a key part of our values and is a
step in the "contributor journey", called the Kubernetes [contributor
ladder][ldr]. We need more diverse, trusted folks from all backgrounds to grow
in these areas. Balancing being welcoming and identifying contributors to
encourage to stick around at scale is difficult, especially with tens of
thousands of casual contributors (yes, a small city) and many cultures that come
together. 30 new leaders have stepped up to Chair and other roles in 2020, but
bandwidth for the reviewers and approvers in many subprojects remains a
challenge as does the diversity of those folks.

> The Groups utilize the following to find and grow contributors:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### What we've done
```

Can we label this "What we've done"? See notes on making the formatting of all these sub-sections under Themes the same.

- Consistent labeling of issues with `good-first-issue` and `help-wanted`. This
  was reported as the most successful way of landing new contributors.
- Intentionally creating space at meetings for new contributors to get involved
  and/or a dedicated triage meeting that provide an overview of current 
  priorities
- Programs such as [Meet Our Contributors], an Office hours like space where
  people can ask questions related to contributing.
- Contributor events such as Contributor Summits, or Maintainer focused sessions
  at KubeCon.

> - One-on-One sessions for dedicated contributors that have demonstrated a vested

Reviewer: What's the action (verb) here? ("Mentoring contributors through the contributor ladder in one on one sessions with experienced contributors"?)

> - Consistent labeling of issues with `good-first-issue` and `help-wanted`. This
>   was reported as the most successful way of landing new contributors.
> - Intentionally creating space at meetings for new contributors to get involved
>   and/or a dedicated triage meeting that provide an overview of current 
>   priorities
> - Programs such as [Meet Our Contributors], an Office hours like space where
>   people can ask questions related to contributing.
> - Contributor events such as Contributor Summits, or Maintainer focused sessions
>   at KubeCon.
> - One-on-One sessions for dedicated contributors that have demonstrated a vested
>   interest in contributing and climbing the contributor ladder.
> - Group study groups for reviewers, approvers, and Chairs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Consistent labeling of issues with `good-first-issue` and `help-wanted`. This
  was reported as the most successful way of landing new contributors.
- Creating space at meetings for new contributors to get involved
  and/or a dedicated triage meeting that provide an overview of current priorities.
- Launching programs like [Meet Our Contributors], a place where
  people can ask questions related to contributing.
- Hosting events like contributor summits, or maintainer-focused sessions
  at KubeCon.
- One-on-one sessions for dedicated contributors that have demonstrated a vested
  interest in contributing and climbing the contributor ladder.
- Group study groups for reviewers, approvers, and Chairs.
```

> - Group study groups for reviewers, approvers, and Chairs

Reviewer: "Study groups"? What's the action (verb) here? ("Teaching people to be reviewers/approvers chairs"? "Mentoring?")

[Meet Our Contributors]: https://www.kubernetes.dev/events/meet-our-contributors/

> #### Areas of research:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Areas of research
```

No end punctuation in titles (with some exceptions like `?`)

> - specific outreach to new contributors from backgrounds that are
>   underrepresented in the community, such as BIPOC contributors
> - GitHub automation that will suggest contributors to promote for more
>   visibility to OWNERs 
> - ways to encourage regular review of who is actively reviewing in subprojects
> - scaling the [group contributor ladder program]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specific outreach to new contributors from backgrounds that are
  underrepresented in the community, such as BIPOC contributors.
- GitHub automation to suggest contributors to promote more
  visibility for OWNERs.
- Encouraging regular review of who is actively reviewing in subprojects.
- Scaling the [group contributor ladder program].
```

[group contributor ladder program]: https://git.k8s.io/community/mentoring/programs

## /help-wanted

> The community groups report that they need to grow code and non-code contributors
> into OWNERs files to help maintain the project. 

Reviewer: The people! They're turning into files!!!! 😂 

But seriously, the grammar on this sentence suggests that you are growing people into files.

```suggestion
The Kubernetes project's community groups all want to grow new contributors into maintainers and leads.
```

Below is list of specific contribution needs, special projects, roles available,
and more. Building trust is key and we need folks to stick around. There are
other ways of contributing outside of commits and you'll see those in the
[Other Types of Upstream Contributions] section.

[Other types of upstream contributions]: #Other-types-of-upstream-contributions

**SIG API Machinery**:
- Performing triage (go to a triage meeting and you'll see it first hand)
- Contributors to the Client Libraries like client-go, python-client

**SIG Architecture**:
- Site Reliability Engineers to review KEPs, Production Readiness Reviews,
  and API Reviewers
- Contributors to help curate a mentoring program for people to work across SIGs

**SIG Auth**:
- Audit logging and testing contributors
- KMS-Plugin contributors

**SIG Autoscaling**:
- Creating and running of a triage program

**SIG CLI**:
- A Product/Feature Manager

**SIG Cloud Provider**:

> - more contributors from every cloud to form teams for triage and support, 
> - folks from clouds to help run the cloud provider extraction working group:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- More contributors from every cloud to form teams for triage and support
- Cloud engineers to help run the cloud provider extraction working group:
```

  kubernetes/kubernetes "cluster" directory and resolving how we properly test
  kubernetes/kubernetes in the absence of a cloud provider

**SIG Cluster Lifecycle**:
- Etcdadm
- Cluster-addons

> - Kubeadm contributors 

Reviewer: Expand. Do they just generally want code contributors for etcadm and cluster-addons? What's going on here?

**SIG Contributor Experience**: 

> - full-time (or part-time) community managers 
> - automation engineers: zoom to youtube automation, github automation, slack
>   infrastructure, and more
> - recognition programs for contributors
> - and folks to help create/facilitate contributor ladder mentoring programs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Full-time (or part-time) community managers 
- Automation engineers: zoom to youtube automation, github automation, slack
  infrastructure, and more
- Recognition programs for contributors
- People to create/facilitate contributor ladder mentoring programs
```

"Recognition programs for contributors" -> I get that you want these, but what kind of person do you want? :)

**SIG Instrumentation**:
- Structured logging
- promq contributors

**SIG Node**:
- Sustaining CI

**SIG Scalability**:
- Scalability Test Frameworks and Scalability and Performance tests and
  validation with a deep understanding of Kubernetes 

**SIG Scheduling**:
- Docs for scheduler internals, cluster-admin best practices; standardize triage
  process

**SIG Security**:
- Future Tech Leads

**SIG Storage**:
- Reviewers
- Issue triage (creating and running a program)
- Feature work for things that are co-owned by sig-node, sig-apps, and 
sig-scheduling (ContainerNotifier, Volume expansion for stateful set, and more)

**SIG Testing**:
- Many more companies to invest in this area heavily and bring steady 
contributors to grow the contributor ladder in areas that are crucial to the projects
  infrastructure

**SIG UI**:

> - contributors who will stick around with AngularJS, golang, and knowledge of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Contributors who will stick around with AngularJS, golang, and knowledge of
```

  Kubernetes client-go package

**SIG Usability**:
- We are currently working on a jobs to be done study and an effort to define
  universal personas for the upstream project. Any one is welcome to join and
  participate in these efforts, especially any user researchers, designers, and
  new contributors.

**SIG Windows**: 
- e2e test coverage and API reviewers

**WG K8s Infra**

> -fill this out 

Reviewer: Not done yet!

**WG Multitenancy** 
- We have three main projects: Hierarchical Namespace, Virtual Cluster Project,
  and Multi-tenancy Profiles (think conformancy but for secure multi-tenant
  clusters). Contributors and interested parties welcome! 

> Check out the contributor guide for a comprehensive guide to getting started:

Reviewer: Move to top of section, also:  https://k8s.dev/guide

https://k8s.de/guide.

> ### Other types of upstream contributions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Other types of upstream contributions
```

- Comment on [KEPs][kep] with your use case (this is helpful from end users
  too!)
- Tag `sig/security` on Issues and PRs that you review and have security
  concerns
- [SIG Multicluster] needs use cases and validating our approaches for different
  environments and deployment models 
- [SIG Usability] would like more participants for their [Job Study] and many
  other studies that are going on.
- [SIG Contributor Experience] would welcome part-time and full time contributor
  community managers; will mentor and grow dedicated contributors in a large
  environment
- [SIG Architecture] would like cluster operators to take a 
[production readiness survey]

[SIG Multicluster]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-multicluster
[SIG Usability]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-usability
[Job Study]: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lkPQdBEw-Xb5GEZ48WnpBgQdZ01EmTBhjcxJBlu5qJs/edit#heading=h.xsg4f6e6yk0p
[SIG Contributor Experience]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-contributor-experience
[SIG Architecture]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-architecture
[production readiness survey]: https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSc-J-Ydu5vp5G9vdvV5gBcraEDN_Bl-HSkVm15vAlU_orDvoA/viewform

> ## Growth Areas

Reviewer: This section should be above `/help-wanted` for sure, and probably directly under `Accolades`.

> ### Focus on Reliability

Reviewer: This section is super well written!

The community is excited to welcome the new lens on reliability through
Production Readiness Reviews, KEPs, and the new Working Group for Reliability.
This effort continues to increase confidence for end users use Kubernetes to

> manage production workloads by ensuring the core is stable and reliable.
> This means the features are:
> - Observable - you can tell that it is in use and working properly, and are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
manage production workloads by ensuring the core is stable and reliable.

This means the features are:

- Observable: you can tell that it is in use and working properly, and are
```

>   able to define reasonable service level objectives for the feature.
> - Supportable - the feature is well documented with a playbook covering failure
>   modes, dependencies and what happens when those fail or degrade, and a
>   troubleshooting guide.
> - Scalable - the feature does not introduce scaling issues.
> - Recoverable - the feature can be disabled or rolled back easily and without
>   data loss

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  able to define reasonable service level objectives for the feature.
- Supportable: the feature is well documented with a playbook covering failure
  modes, dependencies and what happens when those fail or degrade, and a
  troubleshooting guide.
- Scalable: the feature does not introduce scaling issues.
- Recoverable: the feature can be disabled or rolled back easily and without
  data loss
```

  
[new bot]: https://sigs.k8s.io/slack-infra/slack-moderator-words
[clear path]: https://www.kubernetes.dev/resources/rename/
[`blacklist`]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/5341

### All eyes on SECURITY.md

This year brought the creation of [SIG Security], in response to the greater
community and industry focus on the security of critical pieces of software
like Kubernetes. This new SIG grew out of the previous Security Audit Working
Group, and is designed to be a clear home for security-focused discussions
across the project.

This new group, partnering with the existing Product Security Committee, will
focus on horizontal security initiatives for the Kubernetes project, including
regular security audits, the vulnerability management process, cross-cutting
security documentation, and security community management.

The Product Security Committee is also currently discussing a
[name change to "Security Response Committee"] to better reflect the role they
play in security response.

[SIG Security]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-security/charter.md
[name change to "Security Response Committee"]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/5597

> ### Did someone say KEPs?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Improving Kubernetes Enhancements
```

It's cute and I like the original, but someone who isn't us won't get it and won't understand this section without a better title.

> Our project enhancement process, Kubernetes Enhancement Proposals, continues
> to evolve and mature. As we use and iterate on the process, we are consistently
> learning better ways to communicate, debate, and ultimately grow ideas within
> the project.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes Enhancement Proposals, the process by which the community proposes and approves new features, continues
to evolve and mature. As we use and iterate on the process, we are consistently
learning better ways to communicate, debate, and ultimately grow ideas within
the project.
```

community and industry focus on the security of critical pieces of software
like Kubernetes. This new SIG grew out of the previous Security Audit Working
Group, and is designed to be a clear home for security-focused discussions
across the project.

This new group, partnering with the existing Product Security Committee, will
focus on horizontal security initiatives for the Kubernetes project, including
regular security audits, the vulnerability management process, cross-cutting
security documentation, and security community management.

The Product Security Committee is also currently discussing a
[name change to "Security Response Committee"] to better reflect the role they
play in security response.

[SIG Security]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-security/charter.md
[name change to "Security Response Committee"]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/5597

### Did someone say KEPs?

Our project enhancement process, Kubernetes Enhancement Proposals, continues
to evolve and mature. As we use and iterate on the process, we are consistently
learning better ways to communicate, debate, and ultimately grow ideas within
the project.

> The question "Is My Thing an Enhancement?" is still a frequently asked question,
> and the answer continues to evolve over time. KEPs around process have had
> particular focus, as this year had some significant changes to policies such as
> our [release cadence].
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In 2020, KEPs around process and policies have become a focus, and an area of future growth for KEPs themselves. For example, a KEP changing the [release cadence] of the Kubernetes project garnered attention from the community.
```

> As more and more people rely on Kubernetes, continuing to learn and iterate as
> we implement these enhancement changes will be crucial to our growth and
> maturity as a project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This paragraph says nothing that wasn't said previously and is fluff.

[release cadence]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-release/2572-release-cadence

## Current initiatives 

> A summary list of current initiatives from each SIG and WG. Click on the group

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section summarizes current initiatives from each SIG and WG. Click on the group
```

for reported projects completed in 2020 and granular information for each 
initiative with supporting links to KEPs and more. 

- [SIG API-Machinery](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-storage/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)

>     - working on mitigating the impact of removing beta APIs in 1.22
>     - server-side-apply to stable
>     - server-side-apply client
>     - optionally skip backend TLS verification
>     - namespace labels
>     - CRD and admission webhook v1beta1 API removal: reminder on kubernetes-dev.
>     - Immutable fields API
>     - API unions
>     - warnings to stable
>     - apiserver network proxy to beta
>     - priority and fairness to stable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Working on mitigating the impact of removing beta APIs in 1.22
    - Server-side-apply to stable
    - Server-side-apply client
    - Optionally skip backend TLS verification
    - Namespace labels
    - CRD and admission webhook v1beta1 API removal: reminder on kubernetes-dev.
    - Immutable fields API
    - API unions
    - Warnings to stable
    - Apiserver network proxy to beta
    - Priority and fairness to general availability
    
```

> - [SIG Apps](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-apps/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
>     - No report

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [SIG Apps](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-apps/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - No report
    
```

> - [SIG Architecture](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-architecture/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
>     - Increased coverage of stable endpoints by conformance tests
>     - Coordinating dependency updates across projects
>     - Production Readiness Review process was made mandatory in 1.21, improving 
>     scalability, supportability, monitoring, and correct feature enablement
>     - Set up cross-project policies to move features towards stable ([conformance without beta](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/1333-conformance-without-beta), [preventing "permabeta"](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/1635-prevent-permabeta))
>     - Enhancements subproject is working with sig-release to assist SIGs in 
>     taking greater ownership of their KEPs during the release cycle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [SIG Architecture](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-architecture/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - Increased coverage of stable endpoints by conformance tests
    - Coordinating dependency updates across projects
    - Production Readiness Review process was made mandatory in 1.21, improving 
    scalability, supportability, monitoring, and correct feature enablement
    - Set up cross-project policies to move features towards stable ([conformance without beta](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/1333-conformance-without-beta), [preventing "permabeta"](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/1635-prevent-permabeta))
    - Enhancements subproject is working with sig-release to assist SIGs in 
    taking greater ownership of their KEPs during the release cycle
    
```

> - [SIG Auth](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-auth/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
>     - BoundServiceAccountToken
>     - CSR v1
>     - Token Request / bound SA token admission
>     - client-go auth plugins
>     - external kubelet credential providers
>     - New features in Secrets Store CSI driver
>     - Pod Security Policy Replacement
>     - and several other KEPs going to stable on the report

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [SIG Auth](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-auth/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - BoundServiceAccountToken
    - CSR v1
    - Token Request / bound SA token admission
    - client-go auth plugins
    - External kubelet credential providers
    - New features in Secrets Store CSI driver
    - Pod Security Policy Replacement
    - Several other KEPs going to General Availability on the report
    
```

> - [SIG Autoscaling](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-autoscaling/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
>     - No report

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [SIG Autoscaling](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-autoscaling/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - No report
    
```

> - [SIG CLI](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-cli/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
>     - Moving kubectl package code to staging
>     - Our multi-year effort to split out of the main kubernetes repository.
>     - kubectl debug (beta)
>     - Several smaller efforts to unify code across all the commands, and 
>     removing technical debt

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [SIG CLI](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-cli/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - Moving kubectl package code to staging
    - Our multi-year effort to split out of the main kubernetes repository.
    - kubectl debug (beta)
    - Several smaller efforts to unify code across all the commands, and 
    removing technical debt
    
```

> - [SIG Cloud Provider](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-cloud-provider/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
>     - Feature: implement the BackendManager list
>     - Fix flag passing in CCM
>     - Extending Apiserver Network Proxy to handle traffic originated from Node 
>     network

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [SIG Cloud Provider](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-cloud-provider/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - Feature: implement the BackendManager list
    - Fix flag passing in CCM
    - Extending Apiserver Network Proxy to handle traffic originated from Node 
    network
    
```

> - [SIG Cluster Lifecycle](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-cluster-lifecycle/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
>     - Standard for communicating a local registry
>     - several KEPs in a separate KEP process https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/master/docs/proposals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [SIG Cluster Lifecycle](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-cluster-lifecycle/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - Standard for communicating a local registry
    - Several KEPs in a separate KEP process: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/master/docs/proposals
    
```

Reviewer: .... & ecetera for the rest of this list:

1) Please capitalize each list item (unless referring to a code artifact which must be lowercased) 
2) please add an enter (carriage return) at the end of each SIG sublist – this makes it far easier to read and prevents weird markdown rendering.

# Kubernetes Community Annual Report, 2020

This is a summary of the Kubernetes project's contributor community and
activities. This report documents both quantitative measures of community health
(project milestones and snapshot) as well as qualitative measures of the
community as reported by community leaders and contributors to the project.
Please see Appendices for full reports and program goals.

This report is a snapshot of the community as of end of year 2020. 

### Terminology

This report uses the following terminology:

- **Special Interest Group (SIG)**: a body of contributors, responsible on an
  ongoing basis for an area of work in the Kubernetes project. They own code,
  docs, and/or policy.
- **Working Group (WG)**: a body of contributors, responsible for an area of
  work in the project. Unlike SIGs, WGs dissolve once the scoped work is
  complete. Working groups are cross-functional efforts sponsored by a SIG. 
- **Chair and/or Tech Lead**: a contributor who organizes and leads a community
  group.
- **KEP**: [Kubernetes Enhancement Proposal][kep]

> - **OWNER/maintainer**: a reviewer or approver listed in an OWNERs file who
>   reviews, approves, and/or merges commits. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **OWNER/maintainer**: a GitHub user who reviews, approves, and/or merges commits. 
```

[SIG list]: https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/#special-interest-groups
[WG list]: https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/#working-groups

### Data Collection

The Kubernetes Steering Committee sent out a survey to all contributor group
chairs and leads to collect data for this report.

For more, see: 

- [Appendix A: Program Documentation](#Appendix-Program-documentation)
- [Appendix B: Survey Questions](#Appendix-B-Survey-Questions)
- [Appendix C: All SIG and WG Reports](#Appendix-C-All-SIG-and-WG-Reports)

## Contributor Snapshot

As recorded in [devstats] and [sigs.yaml changes], in 2020 the
Kubernetes project had:

- `52,000` Contributors
- `24` Special Interest Groups (SIGs)*
- `9` Working Groups (WGs)*
- `30` New Leaders (Chairs, Tech Leads, Organizers, and Committee Members)
- `14` Emeritus Members of various roles

*Welcome SIG Security and Working Groups: API Expression, Naming, and 
Reliabilty!*

[devstats]: http://k8s.devstats.cncf.io/
[sigs.yaml changes]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/commits/master/sigs.yaml

## Community Milestones

> - `100,000` Issues/PRs in the `kubernetes/kubernetes` repository 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `100,000` Issues/pull requests in the `kubernetes/kubernetes` repository 
```

- `50000` Contributors mark
- `75%`of [API Endpoints included in Conformance]
- `43` Subproject additions or movements
- `35` Stable graduations (KEPs that moved from beta to stable and were 
completed)
- `66` KEPs reviewed by the new Production Readiness Review team

[API Endpoints included in Conformance]: https://apisnoop.cncf.io/conformance-progress?stablechart=percentage

## Governance

At the time of this survey, [all WGs and SIGs] have:

- Up to date READMEs available in the `kubernetes/community` repository
- Up to date group charters 
- Publicly listed meeting times and minutes

[all WGs and SIGs]: https://k8s.dev/groups

## Accolades

> In 2020, the Kubernetes project has achieved major goals and milestones. As we
> look back, the following accolades paint a picture of our journey:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Kubernetes project has achieves major goals and milestones every year. As we
look back, the following accolades paint a picture of our journey in 2020:
```

> In 2020, the Kubernetes project has achieved major goals and milestones. As we
> look back, the following accolades paint a picture of our journey:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Kubernetes project has achieved major goals and milestones every year. As we
look back, the following accolades paint a picture of our journey in 2020:
```
Small correction (self posting to add to batch commit)

A few features of note that graduated to stable status or made significant
progress to reach that point include:
- Driving [`CronJobs`] and [`PodDisruptionBudgets`] (SIG Apps)
- [Moving `kubectl` to a staging repo] (SIG CLI)
- [containerd] and [Cluster API support for Windows] (SIG Windows)
- [Ingress API] (SIG Network)

SIG Architecture implemented [a new policy], and this resulted in many SIGs
pushing features to completion. As a result, the project now has less tech debt
and is more stable for end consumers.

[a new policy]: https://kubernetes.io/blog/2020/08/21/moving-forward-from-beta/
[`CronJobs`]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-apps/19-Graduate-CronJob-to-Stable
[`PodDisruptionBudgets`]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-apps/85-Graduate-PDB-to-Stable
[Moving `kubectl` to a staging repo]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-cli/1020-kubectl-staging
[containerd]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/keps/sig-windows/1001-windows-cri-containerd
[Cluster API support for Windows]: https://sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/docs/proposals/20200804-windows-support.md
[Ingress API]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/keps/sig-network/1453-ingress-api

> ### Issue Triage Improvements 

Reviewer: This section reads really great! 👏

> The [kubernetes/kubernetes] repository has over 100,000 issues and PRs combined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [kubernetes/kubernetes] repository has over 100,000 issues and pull requests at any time.
```

To manage this, the community adopted [new triage workflows]. Several SIGs, such
as SIG Node, SIG Network, and SIG API Machinery established their own triage
processes and structure. This resulted in a noticeable reduction in 

> [Inactive Issues] and [Inactive PRs] open for 30 days or more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Inactive Issues] and [Inactive Pull Requests] open for 30 days or more.
```

As SIGs improve their processes with the new workflow, many are having dedicated
triage meetings. Those who have started triage meetings noted they serve as an
excellent engagement point for new contributors.

[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes
[new triage workflows]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-contributor-experience/1553-issue-triage
[Inactive Issues]: https://k8s.devstats.cncf.io/d/77/inactive-issues-by-sig-and-repository?viewPanel=11&orgId=1&from=1577854800000&to=1609390800000

> [Inactive PRs]: https://k8s.devstats.cncf.io/d/78/inactive-prs-by-sig-and-repository?viewPanel=11&orgId=1&from=1577854800000&to=1609390800000

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Inactive Pull Requests]: https://k8s.devstats.cncf.io/d/78/inactive-prs-by-sig-and-repository?viewPanel=11&orgId=1&from=1577854800000&to=1609390800000
```

> ### Testing, CI, and Scalability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Testing, Continuous Integration, and Scalability
```

### #shoutouts

A meta accolade.

The #shoutouts channel on the [Kubernetes slack](slack.k8s.io) and highlights
on [@k8scontributors] in the last year has kept us going. Thank a member of the
community here and read the past achievements of many. 

[@k8scontributors]: https://twitter.com/K8sContributors

### Remembering Dan Kohn

In [November of 2020, Dan Kohn], the former director of the CNCF sadly passed
away from complications with Colon Cancer. Dan was instrumental in shaping both
the Kubernetes project, the CNCF, and the Cloud Native community as a whole. He
understood that a foundation built on a vibrant and diverse community was a
requirement to be successful, and the project would not be what it is today
without him. 

[November of 2020, Dan Kohn]: https://kubernetes.io/blog/2020/11/02/remembering-dan-kohn/

## Themes

The following themes emerged from multiple community groups reporting in with 
similar experiences - whether positive or challenging - and areas of research to
explore more in the future. 

### Project Communication Strategy 
  
During periods of significant contributor growth, [community groups were

> reporting internally and externally regularly with the group's members, the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
reporting internally and externally] regularly with the group's members, the 
```
fixing link

> project at large, and at KubeCons. This made sense as we scaled ten thousand 
> casual and active contributors during these growth periods but it's now added up
> to duplicate meetings and too many update slides. The COVID-19 pandemic and an 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
project at large, and at KubeCons. This made sense as the project scaled ten thousand 
casual and active contributors, but it's resulted in
duplicate meetings and too many update slides. The COVID-19 pandemic and an 
```

gathering feedback. For example: Slack "standup" theads which feed into larger 
scale reporting to a group on a mailing list.
- Created an internal marketing group under SIG Contributor Experience to help
  facilitate community communication.

[Community Meeting]: https://k8s.dev/events/community-meeting/
[community groups to report in and out]: https://git.k8s.io/community/committee-steering/governance/sig-governance.md
[Governance requirements]: https://git.k8s.io/community/committee-steering/governance/sig-governance.md#chair
    
#### Areas of Research 

- Review SIG charters to re-focus goals of each group at the current state of
  maturity
- Expand on async meeting adoption and establish best practices 
- Improving subproject communication and connective glue back to the sponsoring
  SIG
- Clarify conditions for archiving or putting a subproject in maintenance mode
- Connecting with the end user community and understanding what they want to
  hear from upstream
  
    
### Refining the Contributor Lifecycle

There are a number of ways to define membership to the Kubernetes project
and its community groups. The project's community groups must define

> their own membership terms and then various other activities and roles.
> Membership can drive:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
their own membership terms and any other roles within their group.

Membership drives:
```

- Kubernetes GitHub Organization membership 
- Consensus 
- Voting

> We define [membership] as contributors added to to one of the four GitHub 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Steering Committee defines [membership] as contributors added to to one of the four Kubernetes GitHub 
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe The project defines membership? This is generally how we define it in community-membership.md

> We define [membership] as contributors added to to one of the four GitHub 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The project defines [membership] as contributors added to to one of the four GitHub 
```

there is a separate set of criteria for [elections].

These are guidelines for the project as a whole but do not translate to SIG or
WG based membership, with each group defining membership in their own way.
These methods vary widely and are often founded in the group's specific
workflows. However, there is a common pattern throughout all of them, and that
is the two types of members that are considered early membership (onboarding)
and sustainable membership (ongoing contributor activity).

**Voting and Consensus with Members**

Voting typically doesn't happen in the project unless it's for a Committee role.
Technical and nontechnical decisions are driven mostly by 
consensus of the maintainers in OWNERs files in the code, doc, or policy area of
maintenance. However, in some cases, particularly SIG leadership transitions, 
there have been cases were voting was elected but defining membership and 
reaching out to those members outside of GitHub is difficult. 

#### What we've done

**Sustainable Membership**

While onboarding new contributors is a critical part of a sustainable open
source project, contributors shift focus, change jobs, or

> step away from the project for a variety of other reasons. In late 2019, the 
> Steering Committee updated our guidelines to include an [emeritus status]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
step away from the project for a variety of other reasons. In late 2019, 
Steering Committee updated the project's guidelines to introduce an [emeritus status]. 
```

[elections]: https://github.com/kubernetes/steering/blob/master/elections.md#eligibility-for-voting
[membership]: https://git.k8s.io/community/community-membership.md#member
[emeritus status]: https://k8s.dev/docs/guide/owners/#emeritus
[achievement for climbing the ladder]: https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/issues/11994
[charter process]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/committee-steering/governance/sig-charter-template.md

#### Areas of Research

- Automation around suggesting when contributors may be ready to move to the
  next step in the lifecycle
- Ways to promote a sustainable flow through the various stages of the lifecycle
- Clarifying and/or simplifying definitions around the stages of the lifecycle
- Prompts to assist contributors in knowing what they need to do to 'level up'
  to the next stage in the lifecycle (e.g. prompts when you join a mailing list)
- Joining the project's GitHub organizations is celebrated, but
there are no regular means of celebration or recognition for those that join a
SIG, community group, or [achievement for climbing the ladder].

### Growing a Diverse Group of OWNERs

> Growing on the contributor ladder to ownership doesn't happen immediately after
> your first contribution. Building trust is a key part of our values and is a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moving up the contributor ladder – from contributor, to reviewer, to approver – involves work 
on the part of the contributor. Building trust is a key part of our values and is a
```

step in the "contributor journey", called the Kubernetes [contributor

> ladder][ldr]. We need more diverse, trusted folks from all backgrounds to grow
> in these areas. Balancing being welcoming and identifying contributors to
> encourage to stick around at scale is difficult, especially with tens of
> thousands of casual contributors (yes, a small city) and many cultures that come
> together. 30 new leaders have stepped up to Chair and other roles in 2020, but
> bandwidth for the reviewers and approvers in many subprojects remains a
> challenge as does the diversity of those folks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ladder][ldr]. 

The Kubernetes project needs more diverse, trusted people from all backgrounds to grow
as contributors. Balancing being welcoming and identifying contributors to
encourage to stick around at scale is difficult, especially with tens of
thousands of casual contributors, and many cultures that come
together. 30 new leaders have stepped up to Chair and other roles in 2020, but
bandwidth for the reviewers and approvers in many subprojects remains a
challenge as does the diversity of those contributing.
```

the documentation.

GitHub has also stepped up to help the open source community at large create a
smooth path for `master->main` branch renaming. We discovered some gaps in our
tooling and automation around this as well, but now have a [clear path]. A
number of repos have already started this migration, and we will continue to 
roll
it out to the remainder of the org.
   

Not only is this a WG Naming initiative, but several parts of the project 
reported in ways they are examining the words we use. For example, SIG 
Contributor Experience's slack-infra team implemented a [new bot] for inclusive 
language. SIG Testing has made a significant effort to eliminate [`blacklist`] 
from the code base.
   
There is still plenty of work however in evaluating further language,
implementing changes to code and documentation, as well as the testing and
validation that related code changes don't introduce unexpected regressions.
  
[new bot]: https://sigs.k8s.io/slack-infra/slack-moderator-words
[clear path]: https://www.kubernetes.dev/resources/rename/
[`blacklist`]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/5341

### All eyes on SECURITY.md

> This year brought the creation of [SIG Security], in response to the greater
> community and industry focus on the security of critical pieces of software
> like Kubernetes. This new SIG grew out of the previous Security Audit Working
> Group, and is designed to be a clear home for security-focused discussions
> across the project.
> 
> 
> This new group, partnering with the existing Product Security Committee, will
> focus on horizontal security initiatives for the Kubernetes project, including
> regular security audits, the vulnerability management process, cross-cutting
> security documentation, and security community management.
> 
> 
> The Product Security Committee is also currently discussing a
> [name change to "Security Response Committee"] to better reflect the role they
> play in security response.
> 
> 
> [SIG Security]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-security/charter.md
> [name change to "Security Response Committee"]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/5597

Reviewer: Nit: spacing

```suggestion
This year brought the creation of [SIG Security], in response to the greater
community and industry focus on the security of critical pieces of software
like Kubernetes. This new SIG grew out of the previous Security Audit Working
Group, and is designed to be a clear home for security-focused discussions
across the project.

This new group, partnering with the existing Product Security Committee, will
focus on horizontal security initiatives for the Kubernetes project, including
regular security audits, the vulnerability management process, cross-cutting
security documentation, and security community management.

The Product Security Committee is also currently discussing a
[name change to "Security Response Committee"] to better reflect the role they
play in security response.

[SIG Security]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-security/charter.md
[name change to "Security Response Committee"]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/5597
```

sig-scheduling (ContainerNotifier, Volume expansion for stateful set, and more)

**SIG Testing**:
- Many more companies to invest in this area heavily and bring steady 
contributors to grow the contributor ladder in areas that are crucial to the 
projects infrastructure

**SIG UI**:
- Contributors who will stick around with AngularJS, golang, and knowledge of
  Kubernetes client-go package

**SIG Usability**:
- We are currently working on a jobs to be done study and an effort to define
  universal personas for the upstream project. 
- Any one is welcome to join and participate in these efforts, especially any 
user researchers, designers, and new contributors

**SIG Windows**: 
- e2e test coverage and API reviewers

**WG K8s Infra**
- Help with migrating resources from Google owned infrastructure to community 
owned 
- At the time of this report, only 288 of the current 1780 prow jobs have 
been migrated

**WG Multitenancy** 
- We have three main projects: Hierarchical Namespace, Virtual Cluster Project,
  and Multi-tenancy Profiles (think conformancy but for secure multi-tenant
  clusters). Contributors and interested parties welcome! 

### Other Types of Upstream Contributions

> The above list is good for contributors who have the time to join a SIG and/or 
> have support from their employer to submit patches and other common activities
> upstream. Below are areas of the project that need help, without commits
> necssarily, and would help escalate the project. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above list is good for contributors who have the time or
support from their employer to submit patches and participate in other upstream activities. 
Below are areas of the project that need help but require less dedicated time.
```

- Comment on [KEPs][kep] with your use case (this is helpful from end users
  too!)

> - Tag `sig/security` on Issues and PRs that you review and have security

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Tag `sig/security` on issues and pull requests that you review and have security
```

    - Production Readiness Review process was made mandatory in 1.21, improving 
    scalability, supportability, monitoring, and correct feature enablement
    - Set up cross-project policies to move features towards stable ([conformance without beta](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/1333-conformance-without-beta), [preventing "permabeta"](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/1635-prevent-permabeta))
    - Enhancements subproject is working with sig-release to assist SIGs in 
    taking greater ownership of their KEPs during the release cycle

- [SIG Auth](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-auth/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - BoundServiceAccountToken
    - CSR v1
    - Token Request / bound SA token admission
    - client-go auth plugins
    - external kubelet credential providers
    - New features in Secrets Store CSI driver
    - Pod Security Policy Replacement
    - Several other KEPs going to General Availability on the report

- [SIG Autoscaling](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-autoscaling/annual-report-2020.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)

>     - No report

Reviewer 3: We've now got the SIG Autoscaling report merged (though have a [follow-up PR](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/5819) to make the name match as per other reports):

```suggestion
    - Promoting HPA v2 to stable
    - Promoting HPAScaleToZero to beta
    - Vertical pod autoscaler adding support for customized recommenders
    - Cluster autoscaler adding support for gRPC custom cloud providers
```

Reviewer 2: Thanks @gjtempleton !

Membership can drive:

- Kubernetes GitHub Organization membership 
- Consensus 
- Voting

**Project Membership**

The Kubernetes project defines [membership] as contributors added to to one of 
the four
GitHub organizations. Membership grants a contributor access to test their pull
requests, among other benefits. Membership also defines
a member's role within the project based on their place on the [Contributor
Ladder][ldr]. Membership does not grant voting rights for Steering Committe and
governance matters; there is a separate set of criteria for [elections].

There are two areas to address: early membership (onboarding) and sustainable 
membership (ongoing contributor activity).

**SIG Membership**

When new contributors onboard to the project, they often ask how to become a 
member of a SIG. Community group membership is currently ambiguous, and the 
options available are overwhelming for new contributors. Many SIGs reported that
"joining the SIG mailing list" is how they define membership.
Other responses included Slack channel membership and OWNERs files. Some groups
requested council from the Steering Committee on defining membership.

> **Voting and Consensus with Members**
> Voting typically doesn't happen in the project unless it's for a Committee role.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Voting and Consensus with Members**

Voting typically doesn't happen in the project unless it's for a Committee role.
```
Additional line is required otherwise they're merged in markdown view

**SIG Scalability**:
- Scalability Test Frameworks and Scalability and Performance tests and
  validation with a deep understanding of Kubernetes 

**SIG Scheduling**:
- Docs for scheduler internals, cluster-admin best practices; standardize triage
  process

**SIG Security**:
- Future Tech Leads

**SIG Storage**:
- Reviewers
- Issue triage (creating and running a program)
- Feature work for things that are co-owned by sig-node, sig-apps, and 
sig-scheduling (ContainerNotifier, Volume expansion for stateful set, and more)

**SIG Testing**:
- Many more companies to invest in this area heavily and bring steady 
contributors to grow the contributor ladder in areas that are crucial to the 
projects infrastructure

**SIG UI**:
- Contributors who will stick around with AngularJS, golang, and knowledge of
  Kubernetes client-go package

**SIG Usability**:
- We are currently working on a jobs to be done study and an effort to define
  universal personas for the upstream project. Any one is welcome to join and
  participate in these efforts, especially any user researchers, designers, and
  new contributors.

**SIG Windows**: 
- e2e test coverage and API reviewers

**WG K8s Infra**

> -fill this out 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Help with migrating resources from Google owned infrastructure to community owned. At the time of this report, only 288 of the current 1780 prow jobs have been migrated.
```

our [release cadence].

As more and more people rely on Kubernetes, continuing to learn and iterate as
we implement these enhancement changes will be crucial to our growth and
maturity as a project.

[release cadence]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-release/2572-release-cadence

## Current initiatives 

A summary list of current initiatives from each SIG and WG. Click on the group
for reported projects completed in 2020 and granular information for each 
initiative with supporting links to KEPs and more. 

- [SIG API-Machinery](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-storage/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - working on mitigating the impact of removing beta APIs in 1.22
    - server-side-apply to stable
    - server-side-apply client
    - optionally skip backend TLS verification
    - namespace labels
    - CRD and admission webhook v1beta1 API removal: reminder on kubernetes-dev.
    - Immutable fields API
    - API unions
    - warnings to stable
    - apiserver network proxy to beta
    - priority and fairness to stable

- [SIG Apps](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-apps/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)

>     - No report

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Promoting CronJobs to GA
    - Promoting PodDisruptionBudgets to GA
```
Not sure how this wound up going to No Report O_o they did have some stuff

    - More KEPs listed in their report

- [SIG Service Catalog](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-service-catalog/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - No report

- [SIG Storage](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-storage/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - Container Object Storage Interface
    - Generic Ephemeral Volumes
    - CSI Support for Windows
    - Volume Snapshots stable
    - and other beta, alpha, road to alpha, and stable KEPs listed in the report

- [SIG Testing](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-testing/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - No report

- [SIG UI](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-ui/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - Ongoing maintenance 
    - Real time dashboard
    - New language translations

- [SIG Usability](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-usability/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - Jobs-to-be-done research proposal 

- [SIG Windows](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-windows/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - Privileged containers
    - Network Policy Support

> - [WG API Expression](https://git.k8s.io/community/wg-api-expression/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [WG API Expression](https://git.k8s.io/community/wg-api-expression/annual-report-2020.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
```

    - Server Side Apply landing stable in 1.21; will complete the groups mission

- [WG Component Standard](https://git.k8s.io/community/wg-component-standard/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - n/a

- [WG Data Protection](https://git.k8s.io/community/wg-data-protection/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - Volume Backups
    - Backup Repositories
    - Data Populator
    - Quiesce and Unquiesce Hooks
    - CBT
    - Volume Group and Group Snapshot
    - Application Snapshots and Backups

- [WG IoT/Edge](https://git.k8s.io/community/wg-iot-edge/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
    - n/a

> - [WG K8s Infra](https://git.k8s.io/community/wg-k8s-infra/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [WG K8s Infra](https://git.k8s.io/community/wg-k8s-infra/annual-report-2020.md#current-initiatives-and-project-health)
```

members watching recordings?
* How does the group get updates, reports, or feedback from subprojects? Are 
there any springing up or being retired? Are OWNERS.md files up to date in these
 areas?
* Same question as above but for working groups.
* When was your last public community-wide update? (provide link to deck and/or 
recording)

Membership
  
* Are all listed SIG leaders (chairs, tech leads, and subproject owners) active?
* How do you measure membership? By mailing list members, OWNERs, or something 
else?
* How does the group measure reviewer and approver bandwidth? Do you need help 
in any area now? What are you doing about it?
* Is there a healthy onboarding and growth path for contributors in your SIG? 
What are some activities that the group does to encourage this? What programs 
are you participating in to grow contributors throughout the contributor ladder?
* What programs do you participate in for new contributors?
* Does the group have contributors from multiple companies/affiliations? Can end
 users/companies contribute in some way that they currently are not?

Current initiatives and project health
  

> * What are initiatives that should be highlighted, lauded, shout outs, that your

Reviewer 4: nit: * `the initiatives`
nit: * `shout-outs` or `shoutouts`
